.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\" 
.\" This file contains Original Code and/or Modifications of Original Code
.\" as defined in and that are subject to the Apple Public Source License
.\" Version 2.0 (the 'License'). You may not use this file except in
.\" compliance with the License. Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.opensource.apple.com/apsl/ and read it before using this
.\" file.
.\" 
.\" The Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" Please see the License for the specific language governing rights and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\" 
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.Dd April 19, 2005
.Dt AUDITCTL 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm auditctl
.Nd "configure system audit parameters"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In bsm/audit.h
.Ft int
.Fn auditctl "const char *path"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn auditctl
system call directs the kernel to open a new audit trail log file.
It requires an appropriate privilege.
The
.Fn auditctl
system call
opens new files, but
.Xr auditon 2
is used to disable the audit log.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Rv -std
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn auditctl
system call will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The path is invalid.
.It Bq Er EPERM
The process does not have sufficient permission to complete the
operation.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr auditon 2 ,
.Xr libbsm 3 ,
.Xr auditd 8
.Sh HISTORY
The OpenBSM implementation was created by McAfee Research, the security
division of McAfee Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.\& in 2004.
It was subsequently adopted by the TrustedBSD Project as the foundation for
the OpenBSM distribution.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This software was created by McAfee Research, the security research division
of McAfee, Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.
Additional authors include
.An Wayne Salamon ,
.An Robert Watson ,
and SPARTA Inc.
.Pp
The Basic Security Module (BSM) interface to audit records and audit event
stream format were defined by Sun Microsystems.
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Robert Watson Aq rwatson@FreeBSD.org .
