.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\" 
.\" This file contains Original Code and/or Modifications of Original Code
.\" as defined in and that are subject to the Apple Public Source License
.\" Version 2.0 (the 'License'). You may not use this file except in
.\" compliance with the License. Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.opensource.apple.com/apsl/ and read it before using this
.\" file.
.\" 
.\" The Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" Please see the License for the specific language governing rights and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\" 
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.Dd April 19, 2005
.Dt AUDIT 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm audit
.Nd "commit BSM audit record to audit log"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In bsm/audit.h
.Ft int
.Fn audit "const char *record" "u_int length"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn audit
system call
submits a completed BSM audit record to the system audit log.
.Pp
The
.Fa record
argument
is a pointer to the specific event to be recorded and
.Fa length
is the size in bytes of the data to be written.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Rv -std
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn audit
system call will fail and the data never written if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EFAULT
The
.Fa record
argument is beyond the allocated address space of the process.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The token ID is invalid or
.Va length
is larger than
.Dv MAXAUDITDATA .
.It Bq Er EPERM
The process does not have sufficient permission to complete
the operation.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr auditon 2 ,
.Xr getaudit 2 ,
.Xr getaudit_addr 2 ,
.Xr getauid 2 ,
.Xr setaudit 2 ,
.Xr setaudit_addr 2 ,
.Xr setauid 2 ,
.Xr libbsm 3
.Sh HISTORY
The OpenBSM implementation was created by McAfee Research, the security
division of McAfee Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.\& in 2004.
It was subsequently adopted by the TrustedBSD Project as the foundation for
the OpenBSM distribution.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This software was created by McAfee Research, the security research division
of McAfee, Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.
Additional authors include
.An Wayne Salamon ,
.An Robert Watson ,
and SPARTA Inc.
.Pp
The Basic Security Module (BSM) interface to audit records and audit event
stream format were defined by Sun Microsystems.
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The kernel does not fully validate that the argument passed is syntactically
valid BSM.  Submitting invalid audit records may corrupt the audit log.
