.\"	$OpenBSD: chown.2,v 1.3 1997/01/26 05:10:33 downsj Exp $
.\"	$NetBSD: chown.2,v 1.10 1995/10/12 15:40:47 jtc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991, 1993, 1994
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)chown.2	8.4 (Berkeley) 4/19/94
.\"
.Dd January 25, 1997
.Dt CHOWN 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm chown ,
.Nm fchown
.Nd change owner and group of a file or link
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/types.h>
.Fd #include <unistd.h>
.Ft int
.Fn chown "const char *path" "uid_t owner" "gid_t group"
.Ft int
.Fn fchown "int fd" "uid_t owner" "gid_t group"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The owner ID and group ID of the file (or link)
named by
.Fa path
or referenced by
.Fa fd
is changed as specified by the arguments
.Fa owner
and 
.Fa group .
The owner of a file may change the
.Fa group
to a group of which
he or she is a member,
but the change
.Fa owner
capability is restricted to the super-user.
.Pp
.Fn Chown
clears the set-user-id and set-group-id bits
on the file
to prevent accidental or mischievous creation of
set-user-id and set-group-id programs.
.Pp
.Fn Fchown
is particularly useful when used in conjunction
with the file locking primitives (see
.Xr flock 2 ) .
.Pp
One of the owner or group id's
may be left unchanged by specifying it as -1.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned if the operation was successful;
-1 is returned if an error occurs, with a more specific
error code being placed in the global variable
.Va errno .
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn Chown
will fail and the file or link will be unchanged if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOTDIR
A component of the path prefix is not a directory.
.It Bq Er ENAMETOOLONG
A component of a pathname exceeded 
.Dv {NAME_MAX}
characters, or an entire path name exceeded 
.Dv {PATH_MAX}
characters.
.It Bq Er ENOENT
The named file does not exist.
.It Bq Er EACCES
Search permission is denied for a component of the path prefix.
.It Bq Er ELOOP
Too many symbolic links were encountered in translating the pathname.
.It Bq Er EPERM
The effective user ID is not the super-user.
.It Bq Er EROFS
The named file resides on a read-only file system.
.It Bq Er EFAULT
.Fa Path
points outside the process's allocated address space.
.It Bq Er EIO
An I/O error occurred while reading from or writing to the file system.
.El
.Pp
.Fn Fchown
will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EBADF
.Fa Fd
does not refer to a valid descriptor.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Fa Fd
refers to a socket, not a file.
.It Bq Er EPERM
The effective user ID is not the super-user.
.It Bq Er EROFS
The named file resides on a read-only file system.
.It Bq Er EIO
An I/O error occurred while reading from or writing to the file system.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr chown 8 ,
.Xr chgrp 1 ,
.Xr chmod 2 ,
.Xr flock 2
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn chown
function is expected to conform to 
.St -p1003.1-88 .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn fchown
function call appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
.Pp
The
.Fn chown
and
.Fn fchown
functions were changed to follow symbolic links in
.Bx 4.4 .
