.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Apple Computer, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" The contents of this file constitute Original Code as defined in and
.\" are subject to the Apple Public Source License Version 1.1 (the
.\" "License").  You may not use this file except in compliance with the
.\" License.  Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.apple.com/publicsource and read it before using this file.
.\" 
.\" This Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.  Please see the
.\" License for the specific language governing rights and limitations
.\" under the License.
.\" 
.\"     @(#)clonefile.2
.
.Dd December 04, 2015
.Dt CLONEFILE 2
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME
.Nm clonefile
.Nd create copy on write clones of files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/attr.h>
.Fd #include <sys/clonefile.h>
.Pp
.Ft int
.Fn clonefile  "const char * src" "const char * dst" "int flags"
.
.Fn clonefileat  "int src_dirfd" "const char * src" "int dst_dirfd" "const char * dst" "int flags"
.
.Fn fclonefileat "int srcfd" "int dst_dirfd" "const char * dst" "int flags"
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn clonefile
function causes the named file
.Fa src
to be cloned to the named file
.Fa dst .
The cloned file
.Fa dst
shares its data blocks with the
.Fa src
file but has its own copy of attributes, extended attributes and ACL's which are identical to
those of the named file
.Fa src
with the exceptions listed below
.Pp
.
.Bl -enum
.
.It
ownership information and timestamps are set as they would be if
.Fa dst
was created by
.Xr openat 2
.
.It
setuid and setgid bits are turned off in the mode bits for regular files.
.El
.Pp
Subsequent writes to either the original or cloned file are private to the file being modified (copy-on-write).
The named file
.Fa dst
must not exist for the call to be successful. Since the clonefile() system call might not 
allocate new storage for data blocks, it is possible for a subsequent overwrite of an existing data block to
return ENOSPC.  If
.Fa src
names a directory, the directory hierarchy is cloned as if each item was cloned individually.  However, the use of
.Xr copyfile 3
is more appropriate for copying large directory hierarchies instead of
.Xr clonefile 2
.Pp
The
.Fn clonefileat
function is equivalent to
.Fn clonefile
except in the case where either
.Fa src
or
.Fa dst
specifies a relative path. If src is a relative path, the file to be cloned is located relative to the directory associated
with the file descriptor
.Fa src_dirfd
instead of the current working directory. If
.Fa dst
is a relative path, the same happens only relative to the directory associated with
.Fa dst_dirfd .
If
.Fn clonefileat
is passed the special value
.Dv AT_FDCWD
in either the
.Fa src_dirfd
or
.Fa dst_dirfd
parameters, the current working directory is used in the determination of the file for
the respective path parameter.
.Pp
The
.Fn fclonefileat
function is similar to
.Fn clonefileat
except that the source is identified by file descriptor
.Fa srcfd 
rather than a path (as in
.Fn clonefile
or
.Fn clonefileat )
.Pp
The
.Fa flags
parameter specifies the options that can be passed. Options are specified in the
.Fa flags
argument by or'ing the following values:
.
.Bl -tag -width CLONE_NOFOLLOW 
.
.It CLONE_NOFOLLOW 
Don't follow the src file if it is a symbolic link (applicable only if the source is not a directory).
The symbolic link is itself cloned if
.Fa src
names a symbolic link.
.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fn clonefile ,
.Fn clonefileat
and
.Fn fclonefileat
functions are expected to be atomic i.e. the system call will result all new objects being created
successfully or no new objects will be created. POSIX conforming applications cannot use
.Fn clonefile .
.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion,
.Fn clonefile
returns 0. Otherwise, a value of -1 is returned and errno is set to indicate the error.
.Pp
.Sh COMPATIBILITY 
Not all volumes support
.Fn clonefile .
A volume can be tested for
.Fn clonefile
support by using
.Xr getattrlist 2
to get the volume capabilities attribute ATTR_VOL_CAPABILITIES, and then testing the VOL_CAP_INT_CLONE flag.
.Pp
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn clonefile
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.
.It Bq Er EACCES 
Read permissions are denied on the source or write permissions are on the destination parent.
.
.It Bq Er ENOTSUP
The underlying filesystem does not support this call.
.
.It Bq Er EEXIST 
The named file
.Fa dst
exists.
.
.It Bq Er EXDEV
.Fa src
and
.Fa dst 
are not on the same filesystem.
.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value of the 
.Fa flags
parameter is invalid.
.
.It Bq Er ENOSPC
There is no free space remaining on the file system containing the file. 
.
.It Bq Er EIO
An I/O error occurred while reading from or writing to the file system.
.
.It Bq Er EPERM
The calling process does not have appropriate privileges.
.
.It Bq Er EPERM 
.Fa src
is the root of the Filesystem.
.
.It Bq Er ELOOP
A loop exists in symbolic links encountered during in resolution
of the
.Fa src
or
.Fa dst
path arguments.
.
.It Bq Er EROFS
The requested operation requires writing in a directory on a read-only file system.
.
.It Bq Er ENAMETOOLONG
The length of a component of a pathname is longer than {NAME_MAX}.
.
.It Bq Er ENOENT
A component of path
.Fa src
or the path
.Fa dst
does not name an existing file or path is an empty string.
.
.It Bq Er ENOTDIR
A component of path prefix of either
.Fa src
or
.Fa dst
names an  existing file that is  neither a directory nor a symbolic link to a directory,
or the path argument contains at least one non <slash> character and ends with one or
more trailing <slash> characters and the last pathname component names an existing file that
is neither a directory nor a symbolic link to a directory.
.El
.Pp
In addition, the
.Fn clonefileat
or
.Fn fclonefileat
functions may fail with the following errors
.Bl -tag -width Er                                                                 
.It Bq Er EBADF                                                                    
The                                                                                
.Fa src                                                                           
or
.Fa dst
argument does not specify an absolute path and the                                 
.Fa src_dirfd                                                                             
or
.Fa dst_dirfd
argument is neither                                                                
.Dv AT_FDCWD                                                                       
nor a valid file descriptor open for searching.                                    
.
.It Bq Er ENOTDIR                                                                  
The                                                                                
.Fa src                                                                           
or
.Fa dst
argument is not an absolute path and                                               
.Fa src_dirfd                                                                             
or
.Fa dst_dirfd
is neither                                                                         
.Dv AT_FDCWD                                                                       
nor a file descriptor associated with a directory.                              
.El  
.
.Pp
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr copyfile 3
.
.Sh HISTORY
The 
.Fn clonefile , 
.Fn clonefileat 
and
.Fn fclonefileat
function calls appeared in OS X version 10.12
.
