.\" Copyright (c) 2013 Apple Computer, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" The contents of this file constitute Original Code as defined in and
.\" are subject to the Apple Public Source License Version 1.1 (the
.\" "License").  You may not use this file except in compliance with the
.\" License.  Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.apple.com/publicsource and read it before using this file.
.\" 
.\" This Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.  Please see the
.\" License for the specific language governing rights and limitations
.\" under the License.
.\" 
.\"     @(#)getattrlistbulk.2
.
.Dd November 15, 2013
.Dt GETATTRLISTBULK 2
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME
.Nm getattrlistbulk
.Nd get file system attributes for multiple directory entries
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/attr.h>
.Fd #include <unistd.h>
.Pp
.Ft int
.Fn getattrlistbulk "int dirfd" "struct attrlist * attrList" "void * attrBuf" "size_t attrBufSize" "uint64_t options"
.
.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn getattrlistbulk
function iterates over the items in a directory and returns information about
each directory entry like
.Xr getattrlist 2 .
Note: when
.Fn getattrlistbulk
returns information about a symbolic link, the information returned is about the link itself, not the target of the link.
The order of the directory entries (and their associated metadata) vended by
.Fn getattrlistbulk
is not specified.  Some file systems may return entries in lexicographic sort order and others may not.
.Pp
The function reads directory entries from the directory referenced by the file
descriptor 
.Fa dirfd .
The 
.Fa attrList 
parameter determines what attributes are returned for each entry.
Attributes of those directory entries are placed into the buffer specified by 
.Fa attrBuf
and
.Fa attrBufSize .
The 
.Fa options 
parameter allows you to modify the behaviour of the call.
.Pp
.
.Pp
.
.\" dirfd parameter
.
The
.Fa dirfd
parameter must be a file descriptor that references a directory that you have opened for reading. 
.Pp
.
.\" attrList parameter
.
The
.Fa attrList
parameter is a pointer to an 
.Vt attrlist 
structure. 
All fields of this structure must be filled before calling the function. 
See the discussion of the  
.Xr getattrlist 2 
function for a detailed description of this structure. 
To get an attribute, the corresponding bit in the appropriate 
.Vt attrgroup_t 
field of the 
.Vt attrlist 
structure must be set. 
Volume attributes  cannot be requested but all other supported getattrlist attributes can be used. For this function,
.Dv ATTR_CMN_NAME
and
.Dv ATRR_CMN_RETURNED_ATTRS
are required and the absence of these attributes in the attrList parameter results in an error. Note that 
not all attributes supported by 
.Fn getattrlist
may be vended back by this call, which is why the aforementioned flag must be supplied. In particular
.Dv ATTR_CMN_FULLPATH
may not be valid on all directory entries whose information is requested by this call. 
.Pp
.
.\" attrBuf and attrBufSize parameters
.
The
.Fa attrBuf
and 
.Fa attrBufSize
parameters specify a buffer into which the function places attribute values. 
The attributes for any given directory entry are grouped together and 
packed in exactly the same way as they are returned from 
.Xr getattrlist 2
and are subject to exactly the same alignment specifications
and restrictions. These groups are then placed into the buffer, one after another. 
.Xr getattrlist 2 should be consulted on details of the attributes that can be 
requested for and returned. The name of the entry itself is provided by the 
.Dv ATTR_CMN_NAME
attribute.  Each group starts with a leading 
.Vt uint32_t
, which will always be 8-byte aligned that contains the overall length of the group. 
You can step from one group to the next by simply adding this length to your pointer.
The sample code (below) shows how to do this.
The initial contents of this buffer are ignored.
.Pp
.
.\" options parameter
.
The
.Fa options
parameter is a bit set that controls the behaviour of
.Fn getattrlistbulk .
The following option bits are defined.
.
.Bl -tag -width FSOPT_PACK_INVAL_ATTRS
.
.It FSOPT_PACK_INVAL_ATTRS
If this is bit is set, then all requested  attributes,
even ones that are not supported by the object or file
file system, will be returned the attrBuf. The attributes
actually returned can be determined by looking at the
attribute_set_t structure returned for the 
.Dv ATTR_CMN_RETURNED_ATTRS
attribute. Default values will be returned for invalid
attributes and should be ignored.
.Pp
Please see the discussion of this flag in
.Xr getattrlist 2
.
.El
.Pp
If
.Dv ATTR_CMN_ERROR
has been requested and an error specific to a directory entry occurs,
an error will be reported. The
.Dv ATTR_CMN_ERROR
attribute is a uint32_t which, if non-zero, specifies the error code
that was encountered during the processing of that directory entry. The
.Dv ATTR_CMN_ERROR
attribute will be after
.Dv ATTR_CMN_RETURNED_ATTRS
attribute in the returned buffer.
.Pp
It is typical to ask for a combination of common, file, and directory 
attributes and then use the value of the 
.Dv ATTR_CMN_OBJTYPE 
attribute to parse the resulting attribute buffer.
.Pp
A directory which is a mount point for a file system, will have a value of "DIR_MNTSTATUS_MNTPOINT" set for it's the
ATTR_DIR_MOUNTSTATUS attribute entry. However the attributes for the mount point will be those from the (underlying) file system. The only way to get the attributes of mounted root directory is to call getattrlist(2) on the mount point.
.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion the numbers of entries successfully read
is returned. A value of 0 indicates there are no more entries. Once 0 is returned,
no further entries are returned even if new entries are added to the directory.
Directory iteration should be restarted either by repostioning the offset to 0 by
.Fn lseek
or by closing the file descriptor and opening the directory again. On error,
a value of -1 is returned and
.Va errno
is set to indicate the error.
.Pp
When iterating all entries in a directory, 
.Fn getattrlistbulk
is called repeatedly until a 0 is returned. In such a case if 
.Fn readdir 
and 
.Fn getattrlistbulk 
calls on the same fd are mixed, the behavior is undefined.

.Pp
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn getattrlistbulk
will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.
.It Bq Er EBADF
.Fa dirfd 
is not a valid file descriptor for a directory open for reading.
.
.It Bq Er ENOTDIR
The File descriptor
.Fa dirfd 
is not a directory.
.
.It Bq Er EACCES
Search permission is denied on the directory whose descriptor is given
as input.
.
.It Bq Er EFAULT
.Fa attrList
or
.Em attrBuf
points to an invalid address.
.
.It Bq Er ERANGE
The buffer was too small.
.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The 
.Fa bitmapcount 
field of 
.Fa attrList 
is not 
.Dv ATTR_BIT_MAP_COUNT .
.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
An invalid attribute was requested.
.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
Volume attributes were requested.
.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Dv ATTR_CMN_NAME
or
.Dv ATTR_CMN_RETURNED_ATTRS
was not requested in the attrList parameter.
.
.It Bq Er EIO
An I/O error occurred while reading from or writing to the file system.
.El
.Pp
.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.
The following code lists the contents of a directory using 
.Fn getattrlistbulk . 
The listing includes the file type.
.
.Bd -literal
#include <sys/syscall.h>
#include <sys/attr.h>
#include <sys/errno.h>
#include <sys/vnode.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <assert.h>
#include <stddef.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <stdbool.h>

typedef struct val_attrs {
    uint32_t          length;
    attribute_set_t   returned;
    uint32_t          error;
    attrreference_t   name_info;
    char              *name;
    fsobj_type_t      obj_type;
} val_attrs_t;


void demo(const char *dirpath)
{
    int error;
    int dirfd;
    struct attrlist attrList;
    char *entry_start;
    char attrBuf[256];

    memset(&attrList, 0, sizeof(attrList));
    attrList.bitmapcount = ATTR_BIT_MAP_COUNT;
    attrList.commonattr  = ATTR_CMN_RETURNED_ATTRS |
                           ATTR_CMN_NAME |
                           ATTR_CMN_ERROR |
                           ATTR_CMN_OBJTYPE;

    error = 0;
    dirfd = open(dirpath, O_RDONLY, 0);
    if (dirfd < 0) {
        error = errno;
        printf("Could not open directory %s", dirpath);
        perror("Error was ");
    } else {
        for (;;) {
            int retcount;

            retcount = getattrlistbulk(dirfd, &attrList, &attrBuf[0],
                               sizeof(attrBuf), 0);
            printf("\engetattrlistbulk returned %d", retcount);
            if (retcount == -1) {
                error = errno;
                perror("Error returned : ");
                printf("\en");
                break;
            } else if (retcount == 0) {
                /* No more entries in directory */
                error = 0;
                break;
            } else {
                int    index;
                uint32_t total_length;
                char   *field;

                entry_start = &attrBuf[0];
                total_length = 0;
                printf(" -> entries returned");
                for (index = 0; index < retcount; index++) {
                    val_attrs_t    attrs = {0};

                    printf("\en Entry %d", index);
                    printf("  --  ");
                    field = entry_start;
                    attrs.length = *(uint32_t *)field;
                    printf(" Length %d ", attrs.length);
                    total_length += attrs.length;
                    printf(" Total Length %d ", total_length);
                    field += sizeof(uint32_t);
                    printf("  --  ");

                    /* set starting point for next entry */
                    entry_start += attrs.length;

                    attrs.returned = *(attribute_set_t *)field;
                    field += sizeof(attribute_set_t);

                    if (attrs.returned.commonattr & ATTR_CMN_ERROR) {
                        attrs.error = *(uint32_t *)field;
                        field += sizeof(uint32_t);
                    }

                    if (attrs.returned.commonattr & ATTR_CMN_NAME) {
                        attrs.name =  field;
                        attrs.name_info = *(attrreference_t *)field;
                        field += sizeof(attrreference_t);
                        printf("  %s ", (attrs.name +
                            attrs.name_info.attr_dataoffset));
                    }

                    /* Check for error for this entry */
                    if (attrs.error) {
                        /*
                         * Print error and move on to next
                         * entry
                         */
                        printf("Error in reading attributes for directory \
                               entry %d", attrs.error);
                        continue;
                    }

                    printf("  --  ");
                    if (attrs.returned.commonattr & ATTR_CMN_OBJTYPE) {
                        attrs.obj_type = *(fsobj_type_t *)field;
                        field += sizeof(fsobj_type_t);
                        
                        switch (attrs.obj_type) {
                            case VREG:
                                printf("file  ");
                                break;
                            case VDIR:
                                printf("directory    ");
                                break;
                            default:
                                printf("obj_type = %-2d  ", attrs.obj_type);
                                break;
                        }
                    }
                    printf("  --  ");
                }
            }
        }
        (void)close(dirfd);
    }
}
.Ed
.Pp
.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.
.Xr getattrlist 2 ,
.Xr lseek 2
.
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Fn getattrlistbulk
function call appeared in OS X version 10.10
.
