.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008-2009 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_OSREFERENCE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\" 
.\" This file contains Original Code and/or Modifications of Original Code
.\" as defined in and that are subject to the Apple Public Source License
.\" Version 2.0 (the 'License'). You may not use this file except in
.\" compliance with the License. The rights granted to you under the License
.\" may not be used to create, or enable the creation or redistribution of,
.\" unlawful or unlicensed copies of an Apple operating system, or to
.\" circumvent, violate, or enable the circumvention or violation of, any
.\" terms of an Apple operating system software license agreement.
.\" 
.\" Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.opensource.apple.com/apsl/ and read it before using this file.
.\" 
.\" The Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" Please see the License for the specific language governing rights and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\" 
.\" @APPLE_OSREFERENCE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.Dd March 6, 2009
.Dt GETAUDIT 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm getaudit ,
.Nm getaudit_addr
.Nd "retrieve audit session state"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In bsm/audit.h
.Ft int
.Fn getaudit "auditinfo_t *auditinfo"
.Ft int
.Fn getaudit_addr "auditinfo_addr_t *auditinfo_addr" "u_int length"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn getaudit
system call
retrieves the active audit session state for the current process via the
.Vt auditinfo_t
pointed to by
.Fa auditinfo .
The
.Fn getaudit_addr
system call
retrieves extended state via
.Fa auditinfo_addr
and
.Fa length .
.Pp
The
.Fa auditinfo_t
data structure is defined as follows:
.nf
.in +4n

struct auditinfo {
	au_id_t        ai_auid;         /* Audit user ID */
	au_mask_t      ai_mask;         /* Audit masks */
	au_tid_t       ai_termid;       /* Terminal ID */
	au_asid_t      ai_asid;         /* Audit session ID */
};
typedef struct auditinfo        auditinfo_t;
.in
.fi
.Pp
The
.Fa ai_auid
variable contains the audit identifier which is recorded in the audit log for
each event the process caused.
.PP

The
.Fa au_mask_t
data structure defines the bit mask for auditing successful and failed events
out of the predefined list of event classes. It is defined as follows:
.nf
.in +4n

struct au_mask {
	unsigned int    am_success;     /* success bits */
	unsigned int    am_failure;     /* failure bits */
};
typedef struct au_mask  au_mask_t;
.in
.fi
.PP

The
.Fa au_termid_t
data structure defines the Terminal ID recorded with every event caused by the
process. It is defined as follows:
.nf
.in +4n

struct au_tid {
	dev_t           port;
	u_int32_t       machine;
};
typedef struct au_tid   au_tid_t;
.in
.fi
.PP

The
.Fa ai_asid
variable contains the audit session ID which is recorded with every event
caused by the process.
.Pp
The
.Fn getaudit_addr
system call
uses the expanded
.Fa auditinfo_addr_t
data structure supports Terminal IDs with larger addresses such as those used
in IP version 6.  It is defined as follows:
.nf
.in +4n

struct auditinfo_addr {
	au_id_t         ai_auid;        /* Audit user ID. */
	au_mask_t       ai_mask;        /* Audit masks. */
	au_tid_addr_t   ai_termid;      /* Terminal ID. */
	au_asid_t       ai_asid;        /* Audit session ID. */
	u_int64_t	ai_flags;	/* Audit session flags. */
};
typedef struct auditinfo_addr   auditinfo_addr_t;
.in
.fi
.Pp

The
.Fa au_tid_addr_t
data structure which includes a larger address storage field and an additional
field with the type of address stored:
.nf
.in +4n

struct au_tid_addr {
	dev_t           at_port;
	u_int32_t       at_type;
	u_int32_t       at_addr[4];
};
typedef struct au_tid_addr      au_tid_addr_t;
.in
.fi
.Pp
Without appropriate privilege the audit mask fields will be set to all
ones. 
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Rv -std getaudit getaudit_addr
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn getaudit
function will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EFAULT
A failure occurred while data transferred to or from
the kernel failed.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
Illegal argument was passed by a system call.
.It Bq Er EOVERFLOW
The
.Fa length
argument indicates an overflow condition will occur.
.It Bq Er ERANGE
The address is too big and, therefore, 
.Fn getaudit_addr
should be used instead.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audit 2 ,
.Xr auditon 2 ,
.Xr getauid 2 ,
.Xr setaudit 2 ,
.Xr setauid 2 ,
.Xr libbsm 3
.Sh HISTORY
The OpenBSM implementation was created by McAfee Research, the security
division of McAfee Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.\& in 2004.
It was subsequently adopted by the TrustedBSD Project as the foundation for
the OpenBSM distribution.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This software was created by McAfee Research, the security research division
of McAfee, Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.
Additional authors include
.An Wayne Salamon ,
.An Robert Watson ,
and SPARTA Inc.
.Pp
The Basic Security Module (BSM) interface to audit records and audit event
stream format were defined by Sun Microsystems.
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Robert Watson Aq rwatson@FreeBSD.org .
