.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2002-2007 Apple Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\" 
.\" This file contains Original Code and/or Modifications of Original Code
.\" as defined in and that are subject to the Apple Public Source License
.\" Version 2.0 (the 'License'). You may not use this file except in
.\" compliance with the License. Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.opensource.apple.com/apsl/ and read it before using this
.\" file.
.\" 
.\" The Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" Please see the License for the specific language governing rights and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\" 
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.\"	$NetBSD: getfh.2,v 1.7 1995/10/12 15:40:53 jtc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1989, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)getfh.2	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/9/93
.\"
.Dd January 9, 2007
.Dt GETFH 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm getfh
.Nd get file handle
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/types.h>
.Fd #include <sys/mount.h>
.Ft int
.Fn getfh "const char *path" "fhandle_t *fhp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn getfh
returns a file handle for the specified file or directory
in the file handle pointed to by
.Fa fhp .
This system call is restricted to the super-user and is used by an
NFS server's
.Xr nfsd 8
daemon to obtain file handles used in NFS MOUNT service replies.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion, a value of 0 is returned.  Otherwise, -1
is returned and the global variable
.Va errno
is set to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn getfh
fails if one or more of the following are true:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq ENOTDIR
A component of the path prefix of
.Fa path
is not a directory.
.It Bq ENAMETOOLONG
The length of a component of
.Fa path
exceeds
.Dv {NAME_MAX}
characters, or the length of
.Fa path
exceeds
.Dv {PATH_MAX}
characters.
.It Bq ENOENT
The file referred to by
.Fa path
does not exist.
.It Bq EPERM
The caller is not the super-user.
.It Bq EACCES
Search permission is denied for a component of the path prefix of
.Fa path .
.It Bq ELOOP
Too many symbolic links were encountered in translating
.Fa path .
.It Bq EFAULT
.Fa Fhp
points to an invalid address.
.It Bq EIO
An
.Tn I/O
error occurred while reading from or writing to the file system.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nfsd 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn getfh
function first appeared in 4.4BSD.
