.\"	$NetBSD: getgid.2,v 1.5 1995/02/27 12:32:53 cgd Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)getgid.2	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/4/93
.\"
.Dd June 4, 1993
.Dt GETGID 2
.Os BSD 4.2
.Sh NAME
.Nm getegid ,
.Nm getgid
.Nd get group process identification
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <unistd.h>
.Ft gid_t
.Fo getegid
.Fa void
.Fc
.Ft gid_t
.Fo getgid
.Fa void
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn getgid
function returns the real group ID of the calling process,
.Fn getegid
returns the effective group ID of the calling process.
.Pp
The real group ID is specified at login time.
.Pp
The real group ID is the group of the user who invoked the program.
As the effective group ID gives the process additional permissions
during the execution of
.Dq Em set-group-ID
mode processes,
.Fn getgid
is used to determine the real-user-id of the calling process.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn getgid
and
.Fn getegid
functions are always successful;
no return value is reserved to indicate an error.
.Sh LEGACY SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/types.h>
.Fd #include <unistd.h>
.Pp
The include file
.In sys/types.h
is necessary.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getuid 2 ,
.Xr setregid 2 ,
.Xr setgid 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Fn Getgid
and
.Fn getegid
conform to 
.St -p1003.1-88 .
