.\"	$NetBSD: getsockname.2,v 1.6 1995/10/12 15:41:00 jtc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)getsockname.2	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/4/93
.\"
.Dd June 4, 1993
.Dt GETSOCKNAME 2
.Os BSD 4.2
.Sh NAME
.Nm getsockname
.Nd get socket name
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/socket.h>
.Ft int
.Fo getsockname
.Fa "int socket"
.Fa "struct sockaddr *restrict address"
.Fa "socklen_t *restrict address_len"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn getsockname
function returns the current
.Fa address
for the specified socket. 
.Pp
The
.Fa address_len
parameter should be initialized to indicate
the amount of space pointed to by
.Fa address .
On return it contains the actual size of the address
returned (in bytes).
.Pp
The address is truncated if the buffer provided is too small.
.Pp
Note: For the UNIX domain, the address length returned is the
.Fa address_len
parameter passed to the previous
.Xr bind 2
system call and not the
.Va sa_len
field of the
.Fa address
parameter passed to
.Xr bind 2 .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Rv -std getsockname
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn getsockname
system call will succeed unless:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EBADF
The argument
.Fa socket
is not a valid file descriptor.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EFAULT
The 
.Fa address
parameter points to memory not in a valid part of the
process address space.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Fa socket
has been shut down.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er ENOBUFS
Insufficient resources were available in the system
to perform the operation.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er ENOTSOCK
The argument
.Fa socket
is not a socket (e.g., a plain file).
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EOPNOTSUPP
.Fn getsockname
is not supported for the protocol in use by
.Fa socket .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bind 2 ,
.Xr socket 2
.Sh BUGS
Names bound to sockets in the UNIX domain are inaccessible;
.Fn getsockname
returns a zero-length address.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn getsockname
call appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
