.\"	$NetBSD: mincore.2,v 1.7 1995/10/12 15:41:05 jtc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)mincore.2	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/9/93
.\"
.Dd June 9, 1993
.Dt MINCORE 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mincore
.Nd determine residency of memory pages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/types.h>
.Fd #include <sys/mman.h>
.Ft int
.Fn mincore "caddr_t addr" "size_t len" "char *vec"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn mincore
system call
allows a process to obtain information about whether pages are
core resident.
The current core residency of the pages is returned
in the character array 
.Fa vec .
For each entry in the character array
.Fa vec ,
the following bit values may be set
depending upon the state of the page:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
.nf
MINCORE_INCORE           0x1     /* Page is incore */
MINCORE_REFERENCED       0x2     /* Page has been referenced by us */
MINCORE_MODIFIED         0x4     /* Page has been modified by us */
MINCORE_REFERENCED_OTHER 0x8     /* Page has been referenced */
MINCORE_MODIFIED_OTHER  0x10     /* Page has been modified */
.fi
.Ed
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion,
a value of 0 is returned.
Otherwise, a value of -1 is returned and
.Va errno
is set to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Fa addr
is not a valid address for user mode.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EFAULT
an error occurred trying to copy to the output character array
.Fa vec .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr madvise 2 ,
.Xr minherit 2 ,
.Xr mlock 2 ,
.Xr mprotect 2 ,
.Xr msync 2 ,
.Xr munmap 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn mincore
function first appeared in 4.4BSD.
