.\"	$NetBSD: mknod.2,v 1.6 1995/02/27 12:34:33 cgd Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)mknod.2	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/4/93
.\"
.Dd June 4, 1993
.Dt MKNOD 2
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm mknod
.Nd make a special file node
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/stat.h>
.Ft int
.Fo mknod
.Fa "const char *path"
.Fa "mode_t mode"
.Fa "dev_t dev"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The device special file
.Fa path
is created with the major and minor
device numbers extracted from
.Fa mode .
The access permissions of
.Fa path
are constrained by the
.Xr umask 2
of the parent process.
.Pp
If
.Fa mode
indicates a block or character special file,
.Fa dev
is a configuration-dependent specification of a character or block
I/O device and the superblock of the device.  If
.Fa mode
does not indicate a block special or character special device,
.Fa dev
is ignored.
.Pp
.Fn mknod
requires super-user privileges.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion, a value of 0 is returned.
Otherwise, a value of -1 is returned and
.Va errno
is set to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn mknod
will fail and the file will be not created if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EACCES
Search permission is denied for a component of the path prefix.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EACCES
Write permission is denied for the parent directory.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EDQUOT
The directory in which the entry for the new node
is being placed cannot be extended;
the user's quota of disk blocks on the file system
containing the directory has been exhausted.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EDQUOT
The user's quota of inodes for the file system
on which the node is being created has been exhausted.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EEXIST
The named file exists.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EFAULT
.Fa Path
points outside the process's allocated address space.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EINVAL
One or more of the arguments is invalid.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EIO
An I/O error occurs while making the directory entry
or allocating the inode.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er ELOOP
Too many symbolic links were encountered in translating the pathname.
This is taken to be indicative of a looping symbolic link.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er ENAMETOOLONG
A component of a pathname exceeds 
.Dv {NAME_MAX}
characters or an entire path name exceeds 
.Dv {PATH_MAX}
characters.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er ENOENT
A component of the path prefix does not exist
or path is an empty string.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er ENOSPC
The directory in which the entry for the new node is being placed
cannot be extended,
because there is no space left on the file system containing the directory.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er ENOSPC
There are no free inodes on the file system
on which the node is being created.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er ENOTDIR
A component of the path prefix is not a directory.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EPERM
The process's effective user ID is not super-user.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EROFS
The created node would reside on a read-only file system.
.El
.Sh LEGACY SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <unistd.h>
.Pp
The include file has changed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr chmod 2 ,
.Xr stat 2 ,
.Xr umask 2 ,
.Xr compat 5
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Fn mknod
function call appeared in 
.At v6 .
