.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Apple Inc.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\" 
.\" This file contains Original Code and/or Modifications of Original Code
.\" as defined in and that are subject to the Apple Public Source License
.\" Version 2.0 (the 'License'). You may not use this file except in
.\" compliance with the License. Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.opensource.apple.com/apsl/ and read it before using this
.\" file.
.\" 
.\" The Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" Please see the License for the specific language governing rights and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\" 
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.\"
.\"	$NetBSD: mprotect.2,v 1.6 1995/10/12 15:41:08 jtc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)mprotect.2	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/9/93
.\" $FreeBSD: src/lib/libc/sys/mprotect.2,v 1.18 2007/01/09 00:28:15 imp Exp $
.\"
.Dd October 16, 2008
.Dt MPROTECT 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mprotect
.Nd control the protection of pages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/mman.h>
.Ft int
.Fo mprotect
.Fa "void *addr"
.Fa "size_t len"
.Fa "int prot"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn mprotect
system call
changes the specified pages to have protection
.Fa prot .
Not all implementations will guarantee protection on a page basis but Mac OS X's
current implementation does.
.Pp
When a program violates the protections of a page, it gets a SIGBUS or SIGSEGV signal. 
.Pp
Currently
.Fa prot
can be one or more of the following:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv PROT_WRITE" -compact
.It Dv PROT_NONE
No permissions at all.
.It Dv PROT_READ
The pages can be read.
.It Dv PROT_WRITE
The pages can be written.
.It Dv PROT_EXEC
The pages can be executed.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Upon successful completion,
a value of 0 is returned.
Otherwise, a value of -1 is returned and
.Va errno
is set to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn mprotect
will fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EACCES
The requested protection conflicts with
the access permissions of the process
on the specified address range.
.\" ===========
.\" .It Bq Er EAGAIN
.\" Insufficient memory resources exist to allow locking a private page
.\" under PROT_WRITE.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Fa addr
is not a multiple of the page size (i.e.
.Fa addr
is not page-aligned).
.\" ===========
.\" .It Bq Er ENOMEM
.\" The specified address range is outside of the address range
.\" of the process or includes an unmapped page.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er ENOTSUP
The combination of accesses requested in
.Fa prot
is not supported.
.El
.Sh LEGACY SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/types.h>
.Fd #include <sys/mman.h>
.Pp
The include file
.In sys/types.h
is necessary.
.Pp
.Ft int
.br
.Fo mprotect
.Fa "caddr_t addr"
.Fa "size_t len"
.Fa "int prot"
.Fc ;
.Pp
The type of
.Fa addr
has changed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr madvise 2 , 
.Xr mincore 2 , 
.Xr msync 2 ,
.Xr munmap 2 ,
.Xr compat 5
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn mprotect
function first appeared in 4.4BSD.
