.\"	$NetBSD: rmdir.2,v 1.7 1995/02/27 12:36:30 cgd Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)rmdir.2	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/4/93
.\"
.Dd June 4, 1993
.Dt RMDIR 2
.Os BSD 4.2
.Sh NAME
.Nm rmdir
.Nd remove a directory file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <unistd.h>
.Ft int
.Fo rmdir
.Fa "const char *path"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn Rmdir
removes a directory file
whose name is given by
.Fa path .
The directory must not have any entries other
than
.Ql \&.
and
.Ql \&.. .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
A 0 is returned if the remove succeeds; otherwise a -1 is
returned and an error code is stored in the global location
.Va errno .
.Sh ERRORS
The named file is removed unless:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EACCES
Search permission is denied for a component of the path prefix.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EACCES
Write permission is denied on the directory containing the link
to be removed.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EBUSY
The directory to be removed is the mount point
for a mounted file system.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EFAULT
.Fa Path
points outside the process's allocated address space.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EIO
An I/O error occurs while deleting the directory entry
or deallocating the inode.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er ELOOP
Too many symbolic links are encountered in translating the pathname.
This is taken to be indicative of a looping symbolic link.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er ENAMETOOLONG
A component of a pathname (possibly expanded by a symbolic link) exceeds 
.Dv {NAME_MAX}
characters, or an entire path name exceeded 
.Dv {PATH_MAX}
characters.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er ENOENT
The named directory does not exist.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er ENOTDIR
A component of the path is not a directory.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er ENOTEMPTY
The named directory contains files other than
.Ql \&.
and
.Ql \&..
in it.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EPERM
The directory containing the directory to be removed is marked sticky,
and neither the containing directory nor the directory to be removed
are owned by the effective user ID.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EROFS
The directory entry to be removed resides on a read-only file system.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mkdir 2 ,
.Xr unlink 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn rmdir
function call appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
