.\"	$Darwin$
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000-2002 Apple Computer, Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\" 
.\" The contents of this file constitute Original Code as defined in and
.\" are subject to the Apple Public Source License Version 1.1 (the
.\" "License").  You may not use this file except in compliance with the
.\" License.  Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.apple.com/publicsource and read it before using this file.
.\" 
.\" This Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an "AS IS" basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.  Please see the
.\" License for the specific language governing rights and limitations
.\" under the License.
.\" 
.\" @APPLE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.Dd June 8, 2000
.Dt SEM_UNLINK 2
.Os Darwin
.Sh NAME
.Nm sem_unlink
.Nd remove a named semaphore
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <semaphore.h>
.Ft int
.Fn sem_unlink "const char *name"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The named semaphore named
.Fa name
is removed.  If the semaphore is in use by other processes, then
.Fa name
is immediately disassociated with the semaphore, but the semaphore
itself will not be removed until all references to it have been
closed.  Subsequent calls to
.Fn sem_open
using
.Fa name
will refer to or create a new semaphore named
.Fa name .
.Pp
If successful,
.Fn sem_unlink
will return 0.  Otherwise, -1 is returned and
.Va errno
is set, and the state of the semaphore is unchanged.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn sem_unlink
succeeds unless:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EACCES
Permission is denied to be remove the semaphore.
.It Bq Er ENAMETOOLONG
.Fa name
exceeded
.Dv SEM_NAME_LEN
characters.
.It Bq Er ENOENT
The named semaphore does not exist.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sem_close 2 ,
.Xr sem_open 2 ,
.Xr semctl 2 ,
.Xr semget 2 ,
.Xr semop 2
.Sh HISTORY
.Fn sem_unlink
is specified in the POSIX Realtime Extension (1003.1b-1993/1003.1i-1995).
