.\" Copyright (c) 2003, David G. Lawrence
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice unmodified, this list of conditions, and the following
.\"    disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd March 31, 2006
.Dt SENDFILE 2
.Os "Mac OS X"
.Sh NAME
.Nm sendfile
.Nd send a file to a socket
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/socket.h
.In sys/uio.h
.Ft int
.Fo sendfile
.Fa "int fd" "int s" "off_t offset" "off_t *len" 
.Fa "struct sf_hdtr *hdtr" "int flags"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn sendfile
system call
sends a regular file specified by descriptor
.Fa fd
out a stream socket specified by descriptor
.Fa s .
.Pp
The
.Fa offset
argument specifies where to begin in the file.
Should
.Fa offset
fall beyond the end of file, the system will return
success and report 0 bytes sent as described below.
.Pp
The
.Fa len
argument is a value-result parameter, that specifies how many bytes 
of the file should be sent and/or how many bytes have been sent.
Initially the value pointed to by the 
.Fa len
argument specifies how many bytes should be sent with 0 having the special
meaning to send until the end of file has been reached.
On return the value pointed to by the 
.Fa len
argument indicates how many bytes have been sent, except when a header or 
trailer is specified as shown below.
The 
.Fa len
pointer may not be NULL.
.Pp
An optional header and/or trailer can be sent before and after the file data by 
specifying a pointer to a
.Vt "struct sf_hdtr" ,
which has the following structure:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
struct sf_hdtr {
	struct iovec *headers;	/* pointer to header iovecs */
	int hdr_cnt;		/* number of header iovecs */
	struct iovec *trailers;	/* pointer to trailer iovecs */
	int trl_cnt;		/* number of trailer iovecs */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fa headers
and
.Fa trailers
pointers, if
.Pf non- Dv NULL ,
point to arrays of
.Vt "struct iovec"
structures.
See the
.Fn writev
system call for information on the iovec structure.
The number of iovecs in these
arrays is specified by
.Fa hdr_cnt
and
.Fa trl_cnt .
.Pp
When a header or trailer is specified the value of 
.Fa len
returned will include the size of header or trailer sent. The user should
provide sufficiently large value of 
.Fa len
as argument including the size of header or trailer, 
otherwise only part of file data will be sent
following the header.
.Pp
The
.Fa flags
parameter is reserved for future expansion and must be set to 0. Any other value 
will cause
.Fn sendfile
to return
.Er EINVAL .
.Pp
When using a socket marked for non-blocking I/O,
.Fn sendfile
may send fewer bytes than requested.
In this case, the number of bytes successfully
sent is returned in the via the 
.Fa len
parameters and the error
.Er EAGAIN
is returned.
.Pp
When a signal causes 
.Fn sendfile
to return the error 
.Er EINTR ,
the 
.Fa len 
argument may return 0 without necessarily meaning the end of file has been reached
as the signal may have been caught before any data was sent.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The
Mac OS X 
implementation of 
.Fn sendfile
uses 64 bits types for size and offset parameters so there is no need for 
a 64 bits version 
.Fn sendfile64
as found on some other operating systems.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Rv -std sendfile
.Pp
The number of bytes sent is returned via the parameter
.Fa len .
A value of 0 means the end of the file specified by descriptor 
.Fa fd
has been reached or that the value passed in 
.Fa offset 
falls beyond the end of file.
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EAGAIN
The socket is marked for non-blocking I/O and not all data was sent due to
the socket buffer being full.
If specified, the number of bytes successfully sent will be returned in
.Fa *len .
.It Bq Er EBADF
The
.Fa fd
argument
is not a valid file descriptor.
.It Bq Er ENOTSUP
The
.Fa fd
argument
does not refer to a regular file.
.It Bq Er EBADF
The
.Fa s
argument
is not a valid socket descriptor.
.It Bq Er ENOTSOCK
The
.Fa s
argument
does not refer stream oriented socket.
.It Bq Er EFAULT
An invalid address was specified for an argument.
.It Bq Er EINTR
A signal interrupted
.Fn sendfile
before it could be completed.
If specified, the number
of bytes successfully sent will be returned in
.Fa *len .
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The
.Fa offset
argument
is negative.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The
.Fa len
argument
is NULL.
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The
.Fa flags
argument
is not set to 0.
.It Bq Er EIO
An error occurred while reading from
.Fa fd .
.It Bq Er ENOTCONN
The
.Fa s
argument
points to an unconnected socket.
.It Bq Er ENOTSOCK
The
.Fa s
argument
is not a socket.
.It Bq Er EOPNOTSUPP
The file system for descriptor
.Fa fd
does not support
.Fn sendfile .
.It Bq Er EPIPE
The socket peer has closed the connection.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr open 2 ,
.Xr send 2 ,
.Xr socket 2 ,
.Xr writev 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn sendfile
system call
first appeared in
Darwin 9.0 (Mac OS X version 10.5) .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page is based on the FreeBSD version written by
.An David G. Lawrence Aq dg@dglawrence.com 
