.\"	$NetBSD: shutdown.2,v 1.5 1995/02/27 12:37:11 cgd Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)shutdown.2	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/4/93
.\"
.Dd March 18, 2015
.Dt SHUTDOWN 2
.Os BSD 4.2
.Sh NAME
.Nm shutdown
.Nd shut down part of a full-duplex connection
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/socket.h>
.Ft int
.Fo shutdown
.Fa "int socket"
.Fa "int how"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn shutdown
call causes all or part of a full-duplex connection on
the socket associated with
.Fa socket
to be shut down.
If
.Fa how
is 
.Dv SHUT_RD ,
further receives will be disallowed.
If
.Fa how
is 
.Dv SHUT_WR ,
further sends will be disallowed.
If
.Fa how
is 
.Dv SHUT_RDWR ,
further sends and receives will be disallowed.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Rv -std shutdown
.Sh ERRORS
The call succeeds unless:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EBADF
.Fa Socket
is not a valid descriptor.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The
.Fa how
argument is invalid.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er ENOTCONN
The specified socket is not connected.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er ENOTSOCK
.Fa Socket
is a file, not a socket.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr connect 2 ,
.Xr connectx 2 ,
.Xr disconnectx 2 ,
.Xr socket 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn shutdown
function call appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
