.\"	$NetBSD: sigpending.2,v 1.2 1995/02/27 12:37:26 cgd Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Berkeley Software Design, Inc.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)sigpending.2	8.3 (Berkeley) 1/12/94
.\"
.Dd January 12, 1994
.Dt SIGPENDING 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sigpending
.Nd get pending signals
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <signal.h>
.Ft int
.Fo sigpending
.Fa "sigset_t *set"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm sigpending
function returns a mask of the signals pending for delivery
to the calling process in the location indicated by
.Fa set .
Signals may be pending because they are currently masked,
or transiently before delivery (although the latter case is not
normally detectable).
.Sh RETURN VALUES
A 0 value indicated that the call succeeded.  A \-1 return value
indicates an error occurred and
.Va errno
is set to indicated the reason.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Nm sigpending
function does not currently detect any errors.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sigaction 2 ,
.Xr sigprocmask 2
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm sigpending
function is defined by
.St -p1003.1-88 .
