.\"	$NetBSD: socketpair.2,v 1.5 1995/02/27 12:38:00 cgd Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)socketpair.2	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/4/93
.\"
.Dd June 4, 1993
.Dt SOCKETPAIR 2
.Os BSD 4.2
.Sh NAME
.Nm socketpair
.Nd create a pair of connected sockets
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/socket.h>
.Ft int
.Fo socketpair
.Fa "int domain"
.Fa "int type"
.Fa "int protocol"
.Fa "int socket_vector[2]"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn socketpair
call creates an unnamed pair of connected sockets in
the specified domain
.Fa domain ,
of the specified
.Fa type ,
and using the optionally specified
.Fa protocol .
The descriptors used in referencing the new sockets
are returned in
.Fa socket_vector Ns [0]
and
.Fa socket_vector Ns [1] .
The two sockets are indistinguishable.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Rv -std socketpair
.Sh ERRORS
The call succeeds unless:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EAFNOSUPPORT
The specified address family is not supported on this machine.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EFAULT
The address
.Fa socket_vector
does not specify a valid part of the process address space.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EMFILE
No more file descriptors are available for this process.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er ENFILE
No more file descriptors are available for the system.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er ENOBUFS
Insufficient resources were available in the system
to perform the operation.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Insufficient memory was available to fulfill the request.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EOPNOTSUPP
The specified protocol does not support creation of socket pairs.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EPROTONOSUPPORT
The specified protocol is not supported on this machine.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EPROTOTYPE
The socket type is not supported by the protocol.
.\" ===========
.It Bq Er EACCES
The process does not have appropriate privileges to create a socket of the 
specified type and/or protocol.
.El
.Sh LEGACY SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/types.h>
.Fd #include <sys/socket.h>
.Pp
The include file
.In sys/types.h
is necessary.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr socket 2 ,
.Xr read 2 ,
.Xr write 2 ,
.Xr compat 5
.Sh BUGS
This call is currently implemented only for the
.Tn UNIX
domain.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn socketpair
function call appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
