.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000-2007 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_OSREFERENCE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\" 
.\" This file contains Original Code and/or Modifications of Original Code
.\" as defined in and that are subject to the Apple Public Source License
.\" Version 2.0 (the 'License'). You may not use this file except in
.\" compliance with the License. The rights granted to you under the License
.\" may not be used to create, or enable the creation or redistribution of,
.\" unlawful or unlicensed copies of an Apple operating system, or to
.\" circumvent, violate, or enable the circumvention or violation of, any
.\" terms of an Apple operating system software license agreement.
.\" 
.\" Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.opensource.apple.com/apsl/ and read it before using this file.
.\" 
.\" The Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" Please see the License for the specific language governing rights and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\" 
.\" @APPLE_OSREFERENCE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.\"     @(#)posix_spawnattr_setsigdefault.3
.
.Dd August 22, 2007
.Dt POSIX_SPAWNATTR_SETSIGDEFAULT 3
.Os "Mac OS X"
.Sh NAME
.Nm posix_spawnattr_setsigdefault
.Nm posix_spawnattr_getsigdefault
.Nd set or get the
.Em spawn-sigdefault
attribute on a
.Em posix_spawnattr_t
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <spawn.h>
.Ft int
.Fo posix_spawnattr_setsigdefault
.Fa "posix_spawnattr_t *restrict attr"
.Fa "const sigset_t *restrict sigdefault"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo posix_spawnattr_getsigdefault
.Fa "const posix_spawnattr_t *restrict attr"
.Fa "sigset_t *restrict sigdefault"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn posix_spawnattr_setsigdefault
function sets the
.Fa sigdefault
on the attributes object referenced by
.Fa attr .
.Pp
The
.Fn posix_spawnattr_getsigdefault
function retrieves the
.Fa sigdefault
on the attributes object referenced by
.Fa attr .
.Pp
The argument
.Fa sigdefault
is the set of signals to be returned to default behaviour in the new
process on creation if the
.Em POSIX_SPAWN_SETSIGDEF
flag is set in the
.Em posix_spawnattr_t .
It's default value must be set via a call to
.Xr posix_spawnattr_setflags 3
or the behaviour is undefined.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
On success, these functions return 0; on failure they return an error
number from
.In errno.h .
Additionally, if successful,
.Fn posix_spawnattr_getsigdefault
will modify the contents of the
.Fa sigdefault
parameter with the current attribute value.
.Sh ERRORS
These functions may fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value specified by
.Fa attr
is invalid.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value of
.Fa attr
is invalid.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr posix_spawn 2 ,
.Xr posix_spawnp 2 ,
.Xr posix_spawnattr_init 3 ,
.Xr posix_spawnattr_destroy 3 ,
.Xr posix_spawnattr_setflags 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.St -susv3 [SPN]
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn posix_spawnattr_setsigdefault
and
.Fn posix_spawnattr_getsigdefault
function calls appeared in
.St -susv3 [SPN] .
