.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000-2007 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_OSREFERENCE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\" 
.\" This file contains Original Code and/or Modifications of Original Code
.\" as defined in and that are subject to the Apple Public Source License
.\" Version 2.0 (the 'License'). You may not use this file except in
.\" compliance with the License. The rights granted to you under the License
.\" may not be used to create, or enable the creation or redistribution of,
.\" unlawful or unlicensed copies of an Apple operating system, or to
.\" circumvent, violate, or enable the circumvention or violation of, any
.\" terms of an Apple operating system software license agreement.
.\" 
.\" Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.opensource.apple.com/apsl/ and read it before using this file.
.\" 
.\" The Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" Please see the License for the specific language governing rights and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\" 
.\" @APPLE_OSREFERENCE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.\"     @(#)posix_spawnattr_setspecialport_np.3
.
.Dd August 22, 2007
.Dt POSIX_SPAWNATTR_SETSPECIALPORT_NP 3
.Os "Mac OS X"
.Sh NAME
.Nm posix_spawnattr_setspecialport_np
.Nm posix_spawnattr_setexceptionports_np
.Nd set or get the
.Em spawn-binpref
attribute on a
.Em posix_spawnattr_t
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <spawn.h>
.Ft int
.Fo posix_spawnattr_setspecialport_np
.Fa "posix_spawnattr_t *attr"
.Fa "mach_port_t new_port"
.Fa "int which"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo posix_spawnattr_setexceptionports_np
.Fa "posix_spawnattr_t *attr"
.Fa "exception_mask_t mask"
.Fa "mach_port_t new_port"
.Fa "exception_behavior_t behavior"
.Fa "thread_state_flavor_t flavor"
.Fc
.Sh IMPORTANT
These functions represent an Apple extension to
.Xr posix_spawn 2
and
.Xr posix_spawnp 2 ,
and as such should not be used by programs intending their code to be
portable to other platforms.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn posix_spawnattr_setspecialport_np
function sets a new value for a
.Em Mach
special port into the value referenced by
.Fa attr
to the port referenced by
.Fa new_port
for a port value of
.Fa which ,
as if the new process had called
.Fn task_set_special_port .
.Pp
The
.Fn posix_spawnattr_setexceptionports_np
function sets the
.Em Mach
port to
.Fa new_port
for a number of exception ports represented by the bitfield
.Fa mask ,
and sets the new default
.Fa behavior
and default
.Fa flavor ,
as if the new process had called
.Fn task_set_exception_ports .
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
On success, these functions return 0; on failure they return an error
number from
.In errno.h .
.Sh ERRORS
These functions may fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value specified by
.Fa attr
is invalid.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value of
.Fa attr
is invalid.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Insufficient resources exist to set the ports.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr posix_spawn 2 ,
.Xr posix_spawnp 2 ,
.Xr posix_spawnattr_init 3 ,
.Xr posix_spawnattr_destroy 3
.Sh STANDARDS
Nonstandard
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn posix_spawnattr_setspecialport_np
and
.Fn posix_spawnattr_setexceptionports_np
function calls appeared in Mac OS X.
