.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000-2007 Apple Inc. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" @APPLE_OSREFERENCE_LICENSE_HEADER_START@
.\" 
.\" This file contains Original Code and/or Modifications of Original Code
.\" as defined in and that are subject to the Apple Public Source License
.\" Version 2.0 (the 'License'). You may not use this file except in
.\" compliance with the License. The rights granted to you under the License
.\" may not be used to create, or enable the creation or redistribution of,
.\" unlawful or unlicensed copies of an Apple operating system, or to
.\" circumvent, violate, or enable the circumvention or violation of, any
.\" terms of an Apple operating system software license agreement.
.\" 
.\" Please obtain a copy of the License at
.\" http://www.opensource.apple.com/apsl/ and read it before using this file.
.\" 
.\" The Original Code and all software distributed under the License are
.\" distributed on an 'AS IS' basis, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, AND APPLE HEREBY DISCLAIMS ALL SUCH WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, QUIET ENJOYMENT OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" Please see the License for the specific language governing rights and
.\" limitations under the License.
.\" 
.\" @APPLE_OSREFERENCE_LICENSE_HEADER_END@
.\"
.\"     @(#)posix_spawnattr_setbinpref_np.3
.
.Dd May 8, 2020
.Dt POSIX_SPAWNATTR_SETBINPREF_NP 3
.Os "Mac OS X"
.Sh NAME
.Nm posix_spawnattr_setbinpref_np
.Nm posix_spawnattr_getbinpref_np
.Nd set or get the
.Em spawn-binpref
attribute on a
.Em posix_spawnattr_t
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <spawn.h>
.Ft int
.Fo posix_spawnattr_setbinpref_np
.Fa "posix_spawnattr_t *restrict attr"
.Fa "size_t count"
.Fa "cpu_type_t *pref"
.Fa "size_t *restrict ocount"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo posix_spawnattr_getbinpref_np
.Fa "const posix_spawnattr_t *restrict attr"
.Fa "size_t count"
.Fa "cpu_type_t *pref"
.Fa "size_t * restrict ocount"
.Fc
.Sh IMPORTANT
These functions represent an Apple extension to
.Xr posix_spawn 2
and
.Xr posix_spawnp 2 ,
and as such should not be used by programs intending their code to be
portable to other platforms.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn posix_spawnattr_setbinpref_np
function sets the universal binary preferences for the spawn attribute
value referenced by
.Fa attr
from the memory containing the
.Em cpu_type_t
referenced by 
.Fa pref
with a size of
.Fa count
elements; the actual number of elements that are set in the attribute
is returned in
.Fa ocount .
.Pp
When
.Xr spawn 2
or
.Xr spawnp 2
is subsequently invoked on a Universal binary with the
.Em posix_spawnattr_t ,
the elements which were set will be used, in the order they were set,
to select the first element in the list which matches any
.Em cpu_type_t
of those available in the Universal binary, using the best slice matching
that
.Em cpu_type_t .
If there is no match, then
the attempt to create the child process will fail with the error
EBADARCH.
If the
.Em cpu_type_t
.Em CPU_TYPE_ANY
is the last element in the list, then rather than returning
EBADARCH
on no match, the system will instead fall back to the standard Universal
binary grading preference order.
If called multiple times on the same
.Em attr ,
the previous preferences will be overwritten.
.Pp
The
.Fn posix_spawnattr_getbinpref_np
function gets the universal binary preferences for the spawn attribute
value referenced by
.Fa attr
(set by a prior call to
.Fn posix_spawnattr_setbinpref_np
or
.Fn posix_spawnattr_setarchpref_np )
into the memory containing the
.Em cpu_type_t
referenced by
.Fa pref
with a prereserved size of
.Fa count
elements; the actual number of elements that are copied from the attribute
is returned in
.Fa ocount .
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
On success, these functions return 0; on failure they return an error
number from
.In errno.h 
and modify the value of
.Fa ocount .
Additionally, if successful,
.Fn posix_spawnattr_getbinpref_np
will modify the contents of the
.Fa pref
array with the current attribute values.
.Sh ERRORS
These functions may fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value specified by
.Fa attr
is invalid.
.\" ==========
.It Bq Er EINVAL
The value of
.Fa attr
is invalid.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr posix_spawn 2 ,
.Xr posix_spawnp 2 ,
.Xr posix_spawnattr_init 3 ,
.Xr posix_spawnattr_destroy 3 ,
.Xr posix_spawnattr_setarchpref_np 3
.Xr posix_spawnattr_setflags 3
.Sh STANDARDS
Nonstandard
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn posix_spawnattr_setbinpref_np
and
.Fn posix_spawnattr_getbinpref_np
function calls appeared in Mac OS X.
